#Locke on the Role of Sameness of Consciousness in Identity

In *An Essay Concerning Human Understanding*, John Locke develops his theory of personal identity—what it is and of what it consists. The primary question that he addresses is what exactly it is that constitutes an individual’s identity. As he puts it, “it is that which makes everyone to be what he calls self, and thereby distinguishes himself from all over thinking things” (Locke 370). Unlike most philosophers who preceded him, however, Locke argues that sameness of consciousness is the principle of identity for persons, rather than the body or the soul. While the proposal succeeds in some places where the latter ones did not, Locke still runs into significant problems with situations in which consciousness may not be continuous or may change, which suggests that his theory is at least an incomplete picture.

To set the boundaries for the overall claim, Locke first defines what a “person” is—“a thinking intelligent being that has reason and reflection, and can consider itself as itself, the same thinking thing in different times and places” (Locke 370). Personal identity, then, as defined before, is the “sameness of a rational being,” what makes one continuous person as differentiated from every other person. From this perspective, we can already see how Locke begins to draw the argument for sameness of consciousness as the principle of identity. While he never provides an explicit definition for consciousness, his explanation of personhood clarifies what he has in mind. Consciousness is deeply connected to memory, reflection, and the consideration by a person of her self as her self. It is also inseparable from thinking, as it is “impossible for anyone to perceive without perceiving that he does perceive” (Locke 370). As a result, then, we can already grant that consciousness must be at least important to personal identity, as it is directly tied to a person’s perception of self and the experience of the world as that self.

How does it compare to the body as a candidate for Locke’s investigation? Immediately, we can see some of the problems with associating personal identity with what Locke calls “matter.” He notes that, while the body is distinctly tied to a personal self, it cannot be the principle of personal identity because bodies change. If someone loses a limb, the lost body part is no longer part of her “self”; rather, it becomes a separate, external object (Locke 370). Conversely, the person (and, by extension, her personal identity) stays the same—the change in a physical body leaves identity intact. Beyond that, it is clear that society as a whole views personal identity as an entity transcending the body. Everyday culture is littered with ideas like reincarnation and body switches that suggest that a person’s self exists independently of her physicality. Some modern philosophers like Nick Bostrom harbor visions of a future in which humans will exist as beings of thoughts, with our minds uploaded to computers. While such views are certainly debatable in their validity (and, in the case of mind uploading, perhaps impossible), they point strongly to a conceptualization of personal identity that lies much closer to the soul or a sameness of consciousness than to the body.

The soul, on the other hand, is a far more complicated case, and Locke’s attempt to differentiate it from consciousness is less successful. He defines the soul as the “thinking substance” and asks whether a person can remain the same “if the same substance which thinks is changed” (Locke 371). His response is that a person can remain the same if she has a different soul and that she can be a different person if she has the same soul, which, for Locke, is sufficient to eliminate the soul as a viable candidate for the principle of identity. That claim radically shifts from the Cartesian view that the soul is the principle of identity, arguing that sameness of soul is not even a necessary condition for personal identity, much less a sufficient one. What it would entail, however, is initially unclear. If we take it that the soul is the substance which thinks in a person and that the consciousness is the mental continuity of a person (from perception to memory), then we can develop a picture of Locke’s reasoning for why the soul cannot be the principle of identity for persons. He gives an example of a prince and a cobbler as a basis for his argument against both the body and soul—a prince and a cobbler change bodies, and though they are now the cobbler and the prince, respectively, to everyone else, they still retain their original identities internally. Locke argues that we can “conceive the same person at the resurrection, though in a body not exactly in make or parts the same which he had here, the same consciousness going along with the soul that inhabits it. But yet the soul alone, in the change of bodies, would scarcely to anyone but to him who makes the soul the man be enough to make the same man” (Locke 372). For him, consciousness is the part that ties the prince in the cobbler’s body to his original identity and, as a result, makes him accountable for his actions from when he was in the prince’s body.

Certainly, Locke provides a convincing argument that the soul alone—whatever that may be—is insufficient for identity, as with his examples of figures of ancient Greece. As he posits, if someone is imbued with the soul of Nestor or Thersites from the Trojan War and yet has none of his consciousness,  “does or can he conceive himself the same person with either of them? Can he be concerned in either of their actions, attribute them to himself, or think them his own more than the actions of any other men that ever existed?” (Locke 372). The answer is resolutely no. Where Locke’s theory is weaker is the argument that the soul is not necessary and that consciousness alone can constitute personal identity. The soul must still play a role in a person’s self, and Locke fails to define it clearly enough directly rebut the argument that a person with the same consciousness but a different soul can have the same identity.

Throughout Locke’s project, he successfully argues against the body and the soul as final answers to the principle of identity. However, in positioning consciousness as the necessary and sufficient condition for personal identity, he grants the theory too much credence on its own, perhaps because one of his primary purposes for tracing personal identity is establishing moral responsibility. For instance, since Locke believes that a person with utter forgetfulness is a different person (as her consciousness is no longer the same), she cannot be considered culpable for her body’s actions. On the other hand, as with the case of the prince and the cobbler, if the prince committed a crime, he would still be held responsible for the actions in the cobbler’s body, and the cobbler would not be morally culpable in the prince’s body.

While that standard works well for that specific purpose, it runs into logistical problems. First, outsiders can never know the identity of a person because her consciousness could change without an outward indication. Locke, of course, has no problem with this difficulty, which might well just be a feature of life—maybe we can never confirm a person’s identity externally. The more pressing problems are that of synchronicity and memory. In everyday life, a person might split her consciousness and give varying levels of awareness to different activities. While Locke would likely argue that consciousness is split into parts of a whole rather than multiple consciousnesses, even the act of splitting one consciousness could theoretically disrupt its mental continuity. Similarly, the memory problem illuminates the problem of a changing consciousness—we gain new memories and forget memories constantly. Locke fails to illustrate whether personal identity can remain intact in the face of the necessary shifts in consciousness. Obviously, to a degree (i.e., complete amnesia), it is clear that, for him, a person’s identity is no longer the same. However, in the more ambiguous cases likely to appear in real life, Locke’s account is still insufficient in explaining consciousness as the principle of personal identity.