#Necessitarianism in Baruch Spinoza’s *The Ethics*

In *The Ethics*, Baruch Spinoza argues in Proposition 33 that “things could not have been produced by God in any other way or in any other order than is the case” (Spinoza 158). His view contradicts the traditional view in modal logic that there exist “necessary” truths and “contingent” truths. A necessary truth is typically defined as a proposition that must be true in any circumstance and in all possible worlds, like the mathematical truth that two plus two equals four. A contingent truth, on the other hand, “could” have been true or false, and Spinoza uses the terms “contingent” and “possible” interchangeably (Spinoza 158). To support his philosophy of necessitarianism, Spinoza appeals heavily to the concepts of God’s perfection and will, claiming that, by the nature of God, everything is the way it is and could never possibly have been any other way.

Perhaps evidently, through the lens of necessitarianism, all things are necessary. Spinoza clearly agrees, taking the stance that “in things there is absolutely nothing by virtue of which they can be said to be ‘contingent’” (Spinoza 158). Hypotheticals (“If things were another way, then…”), then, are absurd because they posit a world in which different circumstances and conditions are possible, and that is resolutely not the case for Spinoza. He argues that necessity comes from reason of a thing’s essence or reason of its cause, and we only deem things contingent because we are unable to judge the reasons that they are necessary. Without the capacity to perceive the “chain of causes” by which a thing is necessary, Spinoza’s project then becomes explaining how we can know that all things are necessary without understanding specifically that which makes them so (Spinoza 158).

The proof that he provides is rooted in God’s perfection and will. Because God is supremely perfect, “if things had been brought into being in a different way by God, we should have to attribute to God another nature different from that which consideration of a most perfect Being has made us attribute to him” (Spinoza 158-159). Spinoza reasons that, because he has established previously that God is perfect in an absolute way, contingency means that things could have been another way. However, allowing for that possibility allows for the possibility that God could have been a different being with a different nature, and Spinoza argues that that line of thinking could spiral—the different nature of God would have to exist, too, and that would mean that more than one God exists, which Spinoza dismisses immediately (Spinoza 158). According to him, the belief in contingency comes from a fundamental misunderstanding about what God’s will is. It is not “absolute will,” but rather a mathematical one that embodies God’s perfect nature and has no relation to what we might consider will in an everyday, human sense.

Spinoza preemptively addresses two objections against necessitarianism in the second half of the proposition. The first is that if God had created the universe another way, it would still be perfect; the second, intended to follow the line of reasoning of the first, is that perfection and imperfection are not intrinsic qualities, but rather designated to things based upon the will of God (Spinoza 159). He responds to the first by elaborating on his original claim—if God had created the universe any other way that it is now, “he would necessarily have had a different intellect and a different will from that which he now has” (Spinoza 159). Spinoza argues that that case is impossible without a change in God’s essence or perfection, and he believes such a change to be absurd. Similarly, to rebut the second objection, Spinoza shows that it would result in a conception of God that would be absurd. If perfection is a matter of God’s will and he can will himself a different nature and intellect that is equal in essence and perfection, he must will that he have a different will (Spinoza 159). As we have seen, God’s will cannot be different, and the objection that things could have been different rests upon that assumption, so Spinoza concludes that things could not have been any other way.

The problem with Spinoza’s argument in favor necessitarianism is its broad and liberal conception of God’s perfection. We should be hesitant to accept that unactualized possibilities are, in fact, impossible because “what could have been” would entail that God has a different nature—Spinoza fails to adequately explain why that must be the case, apart from his claim that a supremely perfect God would only will things in one way according to his one nature. In a world filled with (what we perceive to be) variable minute details and what-ifs, the proposition that everything that is must have been as it is commits too strongly to a rigid God with no choice in his will, creating a world in which no choice really exists. If we remove the discussion from a purely academic setting and try to place it into context, Spinoza has committed to saying that every mundane situation in which we believe there are possibilities—turning left or right, wearing a certain pair of shoes, and so on—is, in actuality, fixed and its outcome necessarily true. More problematically, he believes that it is necessarily true because if the other possibilities truly existed and could have been, God’s nature would have to be fundamentally different, which—borrowing from Spinoza—is absurd. If, on the other hand, Spinoza limits necessitarianism to laws of nature and the like, then some things can be contingent and not necessarily have been the way that they are.