#Cruel and Unusual Punishment in Ingraham v. Wright

*Would Ronald Dworkin and Immanuel Kant agree or disagree that the majority opinion in the case best interprets the Eighth Amendment prohibition of cruel and unusual punishment, and why?*

In the 1977 case *Ingraham v. Wright*, the Supreme Court ruled that corporal punishment in schools did not constitute the cruel and unusual punishment prohibited in the Eighth Amendment of the Constitution. The majority opinion stated that the case did not meet the constitutional level of “cruel and unusual” and that corporal punishment in schools is not within the scope of the amendment. Two of the major thinkers in legal theory, Ronald Dworkin and Immanuel Kant, would disagree with opinion of the court and the reasoning behind the ruling. For Dworkin, the historical basis of the Eighth Amendment—perhaps intended by the “framers” to limit criminal punishment—is the wrong means by which to determine its application. Rather, he argues that we should draw moral principles from the text and apply them in law. In this case, that principle might be that cruel and unusual punishment is morally objectionable, regardless of the historical circumstances around the framing of that amendment. Kant, on the other hand, would disagree with the first part of the ruling in the nature and justification of the punishment, with the position that punishment must be retributive (rather than, for instance, rehabilitative) and should be directly proportionate to the action punished.

In *Ingraham v. Wright*, James Ingraham and Roosevelt Andrews filed a complaint against Willie J. Wright, principal of Charles R. Drew Junior High School in Florida, alleging that the punishments they received (corporal punishment by paddling, resulting in subsequent injury) violated the Eighth Amendment’s prohibition of cruel and unusual punishment. Particularly at the time of the case, corporal punishment was generally accepted in society as a punishment that teachers could deliver to students, as long as it was reasonable and not excessive in force. For the specific case in question, Ingraham once receive 20 licks from a paddle for being “slow to respond to his teacher’s instructions,” and he suffered a hematoma that required medical attention and kept him out of school for several days. In another example referenced in the dissenting opinion, one student received 50 licks for “making an obscene telephone call.”

The majority holding was that, first, the punishment in the case was below the threshold for what should be considered cruel and unusual, and, second, that corporal punishment is not limited by the Eighth Amendment. In fact, the opinion dismissed the Eighth Amendment complaints and instead judged based on the Fourteenth Amendment argument that the punishment did not allow the students due process. The standard for cruel and unusual punishment was “elements of severity, arbitrary infliction, unacceptability in terms of contemporary standards, or gross disproportion,” which was not, according to the court, met. In terms of the scope of the Eighth Amendment, the court took a few points into consideration. First, historically speaking, it was written in the context of criminal punishments, alongside bail and fines. Second, the situation of schoolchildren is different from that of prisoners—public schools are open, children are permitted to come and go freely, and safeguards for students are reinforced by common law.

In discussing the first point, then, Kant’s retributive theory of punishment comes into play. According to that view, society must punish criminals, criminals deserve punishment for their actions, and they should be punished because and only because they deserve it. Adapting the theory to the case of corporal punishment, then, teachers must punish students, students deserve punishments for wrongful actions, and they should be punished because and only because they deserve it. Notably, Kant rejects deterrence and rehabilitation as legitimate reasons to punish someone, as that would be using the person as a means for the purpose of others. With that perspective, then, are the two punishments discussed appropriate?

Given only the context from the Supreme Court opinions, they arguably were not. A student’s slow response in the classroom is scarcely deserving of a physical punishment that leaves an injury for days and requires medical attention—and other possible justifications (creating an example for other students, improving the student) are moot under Kant’s theory, since the students must be ends in themselves and not means. Similarly, the case of the obscene phone call appears wildly disproportionate—what was essentially a prank earned a teenage boy 50 licks of the paddle, the kind of punishment that we no longer even administer to criminals. In comparison, the last judicial flogging occurred in Delaware in 1952, punishing a man who beat his wife. We can reasonably extrapolate from Kant’s theory that punishments that exceed the crime to a significant enough degree can be cruel and unusual, and the incidents at Drew were significantly harsher than the students’ behavior warranted. 

The second point, the question of whether corporal punishment in schools should fall under the Eighth Amendment at all, is one that Dworkin would likely answer in the affirmative, given the majority holding’s historical basis for its argument. The court largely looks at the origin of the “cruel and unusual” language in the amendment and concludes that the framers meant for it to apply to criminal proceedings. In the opinion, Justice Powell notes that the clause can be traced back to an original draft of the English Bill of Rights introduced in the House of Commons that specifically specifies criminal cases—“the requiring excessive bail of persons committed in criminal cases and imposing excessive fines, and illegal punishments, to be prevented.”

Dworkin, on the other hands, dismisses reasoning based on historical intentions as “obscure.” Indeed, backtracking the terms of the Eighth Amendment back to the English Bill of Rights—and, in particular, a phrase that was eliminated from the final draft—and using that as the primary basis for arguing that it should be limited to that scope is a project that involves more guesswork than reasoned interpretation of what is at hand. Instead, Dworkin advocates that judges draw abstract moral principles from the language at hand, looking to historical intent for that more than the exact circumstances of centuries past. As the dissenting opinion states, it would be bizarre to argue that there are cruel and unusual punishments that must not be enacted upon criminals, yet similar punishments are not limited for people who are not criminals. In terms of developing a moral principle, then, it makes sense to extend the protection of the Eighth Amendment to others receiving punishments, particularly schoolchildren attending public schools for compulsory education and who are punished by teachers acting as agents of the state—simply because cruel and unusual punishment is wrong and should be prohibited as a whole under the Constitution.

What the majority opinion fails to recognize, for Kant, is that punishments should only come of desert, and they must be suited to the offense. Corporal punishment for children, widely speaking, is supported more by arguments that it betters the child by teaching her than that the child deserves the pain retributively. Furthermore, even if we grant that corporal punishment is acceptable, it certainly should be reasonable and proportional to the action it addresses, and even Powell acknowledges that the treatment at Drew was “exceptionally harsh,” even if he does not deem it cruel and unusual. Similarly, Dworkin would disagree with the majority opinion, with the perspective that Justice White in some ways shares in his dissenting opinion—that historical intentions are a fuzzy way of determining how to interpret the Constitution and that, if we look carefully at the language that exists, we can find a moral basis for extending the limitation of cruel and unusual punishment to schoolchildren, looking at the nature of the punishment (behavior correction and preservation of order, the same as the punishment we have for criminals). Though the precise meaning of cruel and unusual punishment in school paddlings may not be apparent, we must at least grant that, should it occur, it would be a violation of the Eighth Amendment right.
