#Morality and the Concept of a Living Constitution

*Can Dworkin provide a convincing response to Rehnquist’s challenges to the idea of a living constitution? If so, how? If not, why not?*

In “The Moral Reading of the Constitution,” Ronald Dworkin offers the surprising and typically unpopular view that the correct way to interpret the Constitution is the moral reading. He illustrates a powerful reframing of the idea of the “living constitution” that William Rehnquist challenges in “The Notion of a Living Constitution.” However, even while Dworkin grants the judicial branch more leeway in allowing morality to enter decision-making (which he argues is not only commonly practiced today, but also practically necessary to the process), he ultimately agrees Rehnquist’s concerns and puts forth the moral reading as a better strategy.

What, for Rehnquist, is a living constitution? He presents it as a document under which “nonelected members of the federal judiciary may address themselves to a social problem simply because other branches of government have failed or refused to do so” (Rehnquist 403). In other words, interpretations of the constitution would rely not on what the framers wrote and intended, but rather on what individual judges adapt to fit their own agendas. He concludes that that definition of a living constitution is fundamentally counter to a popular government because it allows “an individual’s persuading one or more appointed federal judges to impose on other individuals a rule of conduct that the popularly elected branches of government would not have enacted and the voters have not and would not have embodied in the Constitution” (Rehnquist 415). Reasonably, then, one might assume that a moral reading of the Constitution would be ruled undemocratic for the same reasons—allowing the leanings of judges too much power in determining laws.

Dworkin builds an argument in favor of the moral reading that, on the whole, takes the reality of how people inevitably interpret the law into consideration while addressing most of the concerns that Rehnquist names regarding a living constitution. He points to the inherent contradiction between how people view the role of morality in the judicial system and how it is present in real life—it is seen as “elitist, antipopulist, antirepublican, and antidemocratic,” or, essentially, the antithesis to what our government should be (Dworkin 6). However, what people tend to forget is that pure objectivity is a myth—interpretation is integral to applying the Constitution to real-life cases, and judges are tasked with the interpreting. Furthermore, Dworkin questions the explanations that judges offer for their decisions that do not draw from moral readings of the Constitution—often referring to historical intentions of the framers or the constitutional structure, sources that are vague at best, particularly if the judges never use them to draw abstract moral principles that can act as guiding principles in making judgments.

Reasonably, he admits that there is some merit in the body of people who find the moral reading problematic. Dworkin summarizes the fear as that it “erodes the crucial distinction between law and morality by making law only a matter of which moral principles happen to appeal to the judges of a particular era” (Dworkin 3). Certainly, that fear is at the heart of Rehnquist’s concerns with the living constitution—the three difficulties that he names are that the Constitution enabled the other two branches of government (legislative and executive) to meet the current times, that the Supreme Court’s past troubles warn against judicial action that “embraces contemporary, fashionable notions,” and that a democratic society should not have a nonelected judiciary advancing its own goals. On the whole, Dworkin agrees that a moral reading should not allow judges the leeway to create or change law on the shaky ground of personal moral beliefs. For him, rather, moral principles should be used as tools to interpret the Constitution with constraints of history and integrity.

Some parts of the Constitution have undeniable ties to morality and, if we refer back to the concept of the framers’ intent, are clearly motivated by ideals of political morality. For instance, Dworkin points to the equal protection clause as one poignant example. We can likely justify its existence with amoral reasons, but surely a clause that ensures that no state denies a person under its jurisdiction equal protection under the law is primarily grounded in a moral judgment that treating people unequally is wrong. Dworkin uses the difference between applying moral principles and inserting personal moral judgments to respond to Rehnquist’s concerns. He writes, “Judges may not read their own convictions into the Constitution. They may not read the abstract moral clauses as expressing any particular moral judgment, no matter how much that judgment appeals to them, unless they find it consistent in principle with the structural design of the Constitution as a whole…” (Dworkin 4). That distinction enables a moral reading of the Constitution with significantly less leeway than its opponents have assumed.

While the questions of the living constitution and the moral reading of the Constitution aren’t identical, they overlap enough for us to reach some reasonable conclusions about how Rehnquist and Dworkin might respond to each other. After all, the idea of the living constitution is that the Constitution should be a dynamic document that adapts to the times under judges’ discretion, and that is understandably subject to criticism about the lenses through which judges look to make more active judicial decisions.

In the end, Dworkin doesn’t disagree with most of Rehnquist’s concerns about the living constitution, but he offers a viable alternative in the moral reading that rejects originalism and still circumvents most of the issues with the living constitution. One example is the Brown v. Board of Education decision by the Supreme Court—if we only look at the strict historical intent of constitutional rights like equal protection under the law, the framers obviously didn’t anticipate the specific question of school segregation. Indeed, in their time, they likely would have disagreed, since segregation was the norm. However, there is little question today that equal protection can (and should) be applied more broadly than to the situation it originally addressed—we use it now to argue for everything from equal pay for women to equal treatment of trans people, and few people would say that these applications are unconstitutional simply because they weren’t the explicit intention of the people who wrote the clause. The originalist strategy “would condemn not only the Brown decision but many other Supreme Court decisions that are now widely regarded as paradigms of good constitutional interpretation… It is as illegitimate to substitute a concrete, detailed provision for the abstract language of the equal protection clause as it would be to substitute some abstract principle of privacy for the concrete terms of the Third Amendment” (Dworkin 12).

That last point is crucial and effectively undermines Rehnquist’s opposition to the living constitution. Rehnquist’s originalist strategy, in the end, is just as problematic as the strategy that bends constitutional law to its own purposes, disregarding language or intent. Originalism, insofar as it goes beyond the words on the paper and restricts the language to only the time and place it addresses, overlooks the simple fact that the Constitution is written abstractly for the express purpose of broad application—not creating or rewriting law, of course, but taking a set of intended moral principles and using them to make judicial decisions. With specific constraints that ensure that judges don’t have free reign for judicial activism beyond their station, Dworkin’s proposal for the moral reading is both realistic and useful in addressing the Rehnquist’s problems with the living constitution in a way that does not restrict our interpretations of our Constitution to the exact circumstances of the world in which it was written.
