#A Defense of the Charter for the International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg

*Can we provide a compelling defense of the Charter creating the International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg without appealing to a doctrine of natural law?*

In the aftermath of World War II, the creation of the International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg called into question the extent to which international law applied to the crimes committed by prominent offenders under Adolf Hitler’s regime. The trials, which took place in 1945 and 1946, appealed to internationally understood standards for what constituted acceptable acts in wartime. Robert Jackson, who served as the chief prosecutor for the United States at the trials, argues that the charter provided the necessary legal basis to rightfully punish what he deems “living symbols of racial hatreds, of terrorism and violence, and of the arrogance and cruelty of power,” even while paying mind to the potentially dangerous ramifications of enforcing “victors’ justice.” While Charles Wyzanski and Nicholas Doman raise serious concerns about the tribunal’s legal justifications, we can provide a defense of the charter without appealing to a doctrine of natural law—namely, by applying international law. Even with questions of specificity and scope, international law clearly has provisions for the types of crimes tried at Nuremberg, and it should take precedence over national law, given the nature of the ruling party within the nation and its participation in the universally condemned acts that occurred in Germany.

The targets of the International Military Tribunal were worthy of punishment on a moral level, all three of the authors agree. Wyzanski, who argues strongly against the trials, reiterates again and again that he does believe that the individuals tried at the tribunal were morally repugnant. However, the larger question he raises is whether international law is an appropriate defense for the charter. The general consensus is that, at the very least, international law exists and extends to nations—that much is evident from rules formed through agreements between nations of the world. Doman, in detailing the arguments of Dr. von Knieriem, contests that individuals can be tried under international law and that international law has any validity when it comes to acts committed in Germany by Germans. The first point is easily addressed—if international law exists, then what precisely would make it applicable only to nations? Rather, if individuals were responsible for certain crimes, would it not be optimal for them to be punished individually? As Jackson notes in his opening statement for the trials, they had “no purpose to incriminate the whole German people.” Reserving culpability for a select few people is, indeed, better suited to cases in which individuals violated international law and cannot be said to have represented their nation as a whole.

The second, questioning the scope of international law within nations, delves into more complicated territory. There is not, to my knowledge, any commonly held thought that the rules of international law necessarily take precedence over national law, and the formulations of international law (treaties, conventions, and so on) are generally intended to dictate interactions between the different nations. Wyzanski and Doman both appeal to the idea that international law gains its legitimacy within a nation by that nation’s acceptance of it. I would still argue, though, that it might be worthwhile to consider that international law should sometimes outweigh national law—in cases like Nazi Germany, genocide creates a vastly different situation within the nation. The dominant party that has control of the nation’s laws could enact gross injustices against a specific group of people left essentially unprotected under national law, making it justifiable for outside parties to intervene in the name of international law.

An alternative to the tribunal that Wyzanski suggests is a series of ordinary military trials, accompanied by an “executive determination” directed toward individuals whose crimes were political (as opposed to crimes like murder that could addressed in everyday court). However, even he admits that there are flaws to his suggestion. First, under what authority—if not international law—could the four Allied Powers seek justice within Germany? Perhaps Wyzanski believes that, in fact, they had no such authority and that it was the place of the German government to pursue its own trials. Once again, that runs into the issue of giving a party expressly aligned against a certain group of people the sole power to right the wrongs enacted against that group. And, second, I question whether it really would have been valid to try the crimes addressed in the tribunal as ordinary crimes. Reducing the acts that took place in Nazi Germany—a genocide of the scale rarely ever seen in history, termed by Jackson as taking “from the German people all those dignities and freedoms that we hold natural and inalienable rights in every human being”—to murder “in the ordinary sense” is surely inappropriate. The crimes in question were systematic, political in nature, and international in scale—anything but ordinary.

The provision for war crimes outside of the ones that might be addressed in everyday courts is still more problematic—Wyzanski even admits that his proposal is ex post facto and exhibits a show of power rather than restraint (what he considers to be the proper function of the law). His argument is that our manner of addressing political crimes, like “planning an aggressive war,” should be political as well, not legal, and a bill of attainder asserts that political justice rather than any form of legal justice. That mode of thinking rests on the assumption that any crime that does not fall within the domain of ordinary crime is criminal not under the law, but under specific political circumstances, and I argue that international law, which indicates crimes against peace (like wars of aggression), is the better recourse because it averts the problem of creating ex post facto law and instead refers to a standard set across the world that governs and regulates interaction between nations. After all, developing international treaties and agreements is necessarily a key component of international law, and we could argue that the tribunal is simply a manifestation of the enforcement of that law, which political war crimes violate.

Even Jackson, who helped to create the charter and represented the United States on the tribunal, recognized the implications of having the victors in war enter a nation and begin enacting law that superseded the national law. However, he cites plausible causes for why the tribunal is a necessary and proper legal act, and he also addresses the points that Wyzanski and Doman make. For instance, in one case, he specifies that the tribunal is not to punish “conduct that is a natural and human, even if illegal, cutting of corners, such as many of us might well have committed had we been in the defendants' positions,” effectively rebutting Wyzanski’s argument that the crimes could have been tried as ordinary crimes. In the end, the strongest defense for the charter—and the argument that Jackson uses—appeals not only to international convention, but also concepts of natural law, which are often the strongest emotional appeals. While international law can, and should, be applied over national law and to individuals and provides a strong legal basis for the tribunal, the most compelling reason, what I suspect is the primary reason held by supporters of the Nuremberg trials, may still be that it punished crimes against humanity, that some acts, like the horrors perpetrated during the Holocaust, must be fundamentally forbidden, even if nations or international conventions do not expressly name them, because they violate the natural law. As Jackson says, “It is not because they [the war criminals tried in the Nuremberg trials] yielded to the normal frailties of human beings that we accuse them. It is their abnormal and inhuman conduct which brings them to this bar.”
